feature-gate-threshold-automation init (#72)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0066-feature-gate-threshold-automation.md

---

> simd: '0066'

Reviewer: According to current rules with would be simd-72

---

## Summary

This SIMD outlines a proposal for automating the feature activation process
based on a stake-weighted support threshold, rather than manual human action.

## Motivation

Feature gates wrap new cluster functionality, and typically change the rules of
consensus. As such, a feature gate needs to be supported by a strong majority
of cluster stake when it is activated, or else it risks partitioning the
network. The current feature-gate system comprises two steps:

1. An individual key-holder queues a feature gate for activation
2. The runtime automatically activates the feature on the next epoch boundary

The key-holder is the one who (with the help of the solana-cli) assesses the
amount of stake that recognizes the feature and decides whether it is safe to
activate. This is obviously brittle and subject to human error.

This SIMD proposes that the runtime itself replaces the human to assess the
amount of stake that supports a particular queued feature and only
automatically activates it when a preset threshold is met. 

## New Terminology

- Feature Gate program: The BPF program that will own all feature accounts and

> possess the capability to revoke them.

Reviewer 2: "and possess the capability to revoke them." - I'd remove this part, as it's unnecessary to describe all functionality that the feature gate program provide in its definition here

- Feature-Request account: The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to track
features requested for activation.
- Feature-Queue account: The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to track
features queued for activation that must have support signaled by nodes.

## Detailed Design

Before this SIMD is published, we will deploy a BPF program to manage feature
activations, which will allow us to revoke pending feature activations
(previously not possible).
The feature activation process will otherwise be unchanged, so no SIMD is
required.
This program will be upgradeable; the authority and process through which it
will be upgraded is outside the scope of this SIMD. Since this SIMD requires an
update to the program, the upgrade details will be determined in parallel.

The initial Feature Gate Program can be found in this pull request to the
Solana Program Library:
<https://github.com/solana-labs/solana-program-library/pull/4987>.
The runtime changes and feature activation that will enable this program can be
found in this feature tracking issue:

> <https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/33547>.

Reviewer 2: I hate to say it but we probably should do a SIMD for this, as a prereq for this SIMD. Should be short and quick to do hopefully!
It feels like we kinda are just sneaking this functionally in here, where it really deserves to be stand-alone. Especially since we're allowing the program to be upgradable. Would be good, in the other SIMD, to describe who can upgrade it and for how long!

Author: Yeah, I agree, it seems like kind of a big deal to not have a SIMD for it.

I can write this SIMD up.

Author: Would you also suggest we delay activation of the [no-op swap feature gate](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/33547) pending results of this new SIMD?

Author: I guess we could just put the no-op there and then let the new SIMD determine the program stuff, but the authority aspect of this new BPF program would also apply to the no-op

### Overview

Consider two arbitrary versions of the Solana runtime, where the newer version
has more features in its feature set.

| v1.14.25  | v1.16.0   |
| --------- | --------- |
| Feature A | Feature A |
|           | Feature B |
| Feature C | Feature C |
|           | Feature D |

> The runtime should activate each of these features when a strong majority of

Reviewer 2: "strong majority" - should we define what this means?

Author: It's described in a later section, but I also just put it here to be more specific!

of stake running v1.16.0, only Features A and C should be eligible for
activation.

This SIMD proposes 3 steps over the span of one epoch to determine which
feature gates are queued for activation and assess stake support:

1. On an epoch boundary, the runtime generates a list of feature-gates queued
for activation.
2. Validators signal which of the queued feature-gates they support.
3. On the next epoch boundary, the runtime activates the feature-gates that
have the necessary stake support

### Representing the Current Feature Set

As mentioned above, a BPF program is being deployed that will replace the
non-existent account `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`, which is
the owner of all feature accounts.

The Feature Gate program will utilize two PDAs to track the authoritative
feature set queued for activation. One PDA (the Feature-Request PDA) will
store newly requested feature activations and the other (the Feature-Queue
PDA) will store the previous epoch’s requested activations.

When a new epoch begins, the Feature-Request PDA will be an empty list. When
key-holders submit the CLI command to activate a feature, the Feature Gate

> Program appends the feature ID to the Feature-Request set at the same time as

Reviewer 2: A reasonable maximum to the number of feature gates that can be activated in an epoch would be helpful (64?) as this would permit the size of these accounts, and the size of the vote account PDAs to be static

Author: Agreed I think this is a good idea. 64 so we can compress to `u64` somewhere?

Reviewer 3: As per discussions on discord, we also need to include some anti-spam mechanisms in the design. Otherwise it's really easy for me to create 64 feature accounts and starve legitimate features. Even worse once revoke is supported, since I could create the accounts right before the epoch boundary, and Revoke them to reclaim the lamports a slot or two later.

I had already been pondering whether Revoke should actually burn the lamports instead of returning them. Thoughts?

creating the feature account . Revoked features are removed from the
Feature-Request list. At the end of the epoch, the Feature-Request set is

> written to the feature queue PDA, where it becomes immutable. The

Reviewer 2: "written to the feature queue PDA" by whom? The runtime I presume? We should call that out

Author: Yep, the runtime. Added this for clarity!

Feature-Request PDA is then reset to an empty list again.

The newly created immutable Feature-Queue can then be used by nodes to signal
support for potential activation in the next epoch.

Note that for any given epoch, the epoch will begin with an immutable set of
previously requested feature activations, and end with the activation of those
with enough support. This process takes one epoch. Therefore, it will take at
least one more epoch than it currently does from the time a key-holder submits
a feature for activation via CLI to when it is actually activated.

### Signaling Support for Features

With an on-chain reference point to determine the features queued for
activation, nodes can signal support for specific features in the queue.

> A node signals its support for a feature set by sending a transaction to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A node signals its support for a feature set by sending an instruction to the
```

Reviewer 2: We'll want to define this instruction specifically in this SIMD

Feature Gate program, signed by their authorized voter, to store a record of
their supported feature set.
This supported feature set would be a bit mask of the list of queued features,
and it would be stored in a PDA derived from their vote address.
Nodes simply examine the Feature-Queue list, and mark a 1 for any features they
have in their feature set. The rest are marked 0.

In the previous example, a node running v1.14.25 would signal the following bit
mask:

```
1   0   1   0 
```

Similarly, a node running v1.16.0 would signal:

```
1   1   1   1 
```

Validators send these transactions signaling their support for a queued set of

> features on the first slot of every epoch and on startup after any reboot.

Reviewer 2: Rather than sending the transaction on the first slot of every epoch (thundering herd!), how about they start attempting to send the transaction at a random time during the first 25% of the epoch and then retry randomly every N slots. 

At restart they send immediately once the health check passes, and then also retry randomly every N slots

Author: Yeah this would work too. As long as they send their initial signal early enough to account for any necessary retries it's ok. Could even be 50% if we wanted.

Note: If a feature is revoked before it is moved to the immutable Feature-Queue
list, it is simply removed from the Feature-Request list and never presented to
nodes. However, if a feature is revoked after it becomes part of the immutable
Feature-Queue list, it remains in the list, and nodes still signal their
support if the feature ID is present in their software. However, the runtime
won’t activate this feature if its corresponding feature account no longer
exists on-chain.
This is how the runtime currently handles features and can be observed here:
<https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/170478924705c9c62dbeb475c5425b68ba61b375/runtime/src/bank.rs#L8119-L8150>.

### Activating Supported Features

Once the epoch concludes, the runtime uses the validator support signals to
activate the proper features.

To do this, the runtime walks all of the PDAs derived from the vote accounts,

> examines their bit-masks, and sums the stake supporting each feature-gate to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
examines their bitmasks, and sums the stake supporting each feature-gate to
```

determine which feature gates meet the desired threshold of supported stake.

For the initial implementation, the threshold will be hard-coded to 95% of
stake, but future iterations on the Feature Program could allow feature
key-holders to set a custom threshold for each feature gate
(including 0%, ie. –yolo).

Once a list of stake-supported features is generated, the runtime rechecks the
Feature accounts in case any have been revoked. Then the runtime processes the
activations using the existing feature logic.

At this point, the runtime clears the existing validator support PDA accounts

> and returns to step 1 to generate the next list of queued features.

Reviewer 2: Rather than making the runtime clear all the PDAs (writes!), the PDA data could include the epoch number that the account was last updated in, in addition to the bitmask.

Author: Wouldn't this cause two potential issues?

1. You couldn't have static sized PDAs anymore, as per [your other comment](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/72#discussion_r1364778010)
2. You'd have perpetually growing PDAs without garbage collection

Another alternative is to use the epoch number in the PDA itself as a seed, but then we end up growing the number of Feature Gate program-owned accounts.

I think it's probably good to have _some_ form of garbage collection, both to keep the number of accounts owned by Feature Gate down and to return rent lamports.

What about _another_ program that can handle garbage collection? The runtime could just assign all them to the "garbage program" instead of wiping their data (not sure if this is more efficient?) and the program could do it's thing. I'm not totally sure how we'd invoke this program though.

clients will aim to push features and want to agree on their activation.

## Alternatives Considered

### Representing the Current Feature Set (Alternative)

An alternate approach to the Feature Gate program’s on-chain storage is to
instead use one single PDA to store the queue and reset it every epoch. This
would allow us to use one less account and one less epoch, but it would make
things trickier when it comes to the timing of validators signaling support for
features.

For example, a key-holder might submit a feature for activation at a point late
in the epoch, so validators would need to be able to signal support for this
feature whenever it is submitted. This means validators would have to
consistently check the feature queue for changes, and possibly issue more
signals in the epoch.

This approach may increase the total required work for a node in a given epoch.

### Signaling Support for Features (Alternative)

Rather than sending a transaction to the Feature Gate program, a node could
instead signal the bit mask in their block header whenever they are the leader.

This would introduce a change to the block header and remove this information

> from being publicly and transparently on-chain.

Author: True. Should I add this as another alternative?

> from being publicly and transparently on-chain.

Reviewer 4: No, modifying the block header is pretty much a non-starter

> from being publicly and transparently on-chain.

Author: I meant the leader-signaled transaction aspect proposed by @ripatel-fd.

> from being publicly and transparently on-chain.

Reviewer 3: @ripatel-fd , our concern with signalling support only in a leader's slot(s) is that it makes validators less flexible as to when they can upgrade and signal support for a new feature. For instance, imagine a node that is leader for only the first 4 slots of the epoch. Once those slots pass, that node must wait at least 431_996 slots to signal support, regardless of whether the operator finds that (~2 days) to be plenty of time to assess the new version/feature set and perform the upgrade.

> from being publicly and transparently on-chain.

Author: We've relaxed the constraint to prefer "send it sometime in the epoch before 128 slots left". If we still want to discuss the leader approach, (in the interest of time passed since this thread) let's open a new thread if we want to discuss further!
